CIP-???? | Cardano FUDS (Financial Updates & Disclosure Specification) (#495)
cardano-foundation/CIPs: CIP-XXXX/README.md

| symbol          | String                                          | Yes      | The shortened "ticker" of the token. Usually all uppercase and 3-5 characters in length                                                                                  |
| explore         | Array<[URI](#uri)>                              | No       | A URI object describing the path to an explorer page. (Example: https://cardanoscan.io/token/0ef620255db71b69adf4cf7eb6619027a7a74f05)                                   |
| holders         | Array<[URI](#uri)>                              | No       | A URI object describing the path to a page showing holders of the token. (Example: https://cardanoscan.io/token/0ef620255db71b69adf4cf7eb6619027a7a74f05?tab=topholders) |
| max_supply      | Unsigned Integer                                | No       | For fixed-supply tokens, what is the maximum, total supply that will ever exist.                                                                                         |

> | emission        | String                                          | No       | One of: "inflationary", "deflationary", or "fixed". Whether the tokenomics model for this token is inflationary, fixed, or deflationary.                                 |

Reviewer: What kind of inflationary model is followed is not asked in the CIP, in case the token supply is not fixed, so a link to that would be welcomed,
As in another case of Fixed and deflationary, it is basically the same thing, and with various Burn mechanisms possible, there is less use of what method of deflation is it.

| generation_date | String                                          | Yes      | An ISO-8601 Extended timestamp of when the token was first created. (Example: 2020-01-01T01:05:37+00:00)                                                                 |

> | allocation      | Array\<[allocation-wallet](#allocation-wallet)> | No       | An array of wallets that received an allocation as part of the tokenomics of the project. (Examples: Treasury, Team, Vesting, and Reserve wallets)                       |

Reviewer: Should this list of Owners and allocation be fixed and determined by us, or should we keep this fluid?

why is the requirement "No" for this?

> | funding         | Array\<[funding-detail](#funding-detail)>       | No       | An array of information about funding rounds that have been conducted                                                                                                    |

Reviewer: Will we try to determine the correctness of this?

We should at least try to determine the correctness of on-chain funding like ISPO or ICO, if possible.

| 3   | Exchange Cold Wallet         |                                                                                       |
| 4   | Exchange Hot Wallet          |                                                                                       |
| 5   | Escrow                       | Tokens held in escrow for some purpose                                                |
| 6   | Marketing & Operations       | Tokens allocated to the team for the purpose of marketing or operations               |
| 7   | Masternodes & Staking        | Tokens allocated to provide "staking" rewards                                         |
| 8   | Private Sale Investor        | Tokens allocated to a private investor during a funding round                         |
| 9   | Public                       | Tokens allocated for public                                                           |
| 10  | Team, Advisors & Contractors | Tokens allocated for the team, its advisors and/or contractors                        |
| 11  | Treasury                     | Tokens allocated to serve as a project treasury                                       |

> | 12  | Liquidity Provisioning       | Tokens to be used by the project for the purpose of providing DEX liquidity           |

Reviewer: in the later stage of high interchain token movement we will also need to cater the case where the tokens are moving across the chains and they might have addresses where the tokens sit that will represent the tokens on other chains and the tokens will move out of that bucket when the tokens are returned back to the particular chain

or a specialised burn and mint mechanism that will also need to be catered for in the "Owners section" or the "Allocation section"

##### Allocation Types

The "allocation type" of a defined allocation. There are only a few defined at the moment but disclosure documents
should use one of the pre-defined numeric types below, represented by an unsigned integer to minimize ambiguity and
errors and allow for ease of future expansion based on community need.

| ID  | Name            | Explanation                                   |
|-----|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| 0   | Private Sale    | Tokens allocated for or during a private sale |
| 1   | Public Sale     | Tokens allocate for or during a public sale   |

> | 2   | Team Controlled | Tokens allocated to or under team control     |

Reviewer: The "owner" should be a subset of the "Allocation wallet/type"

and if we know the set and subset in this way, it will be a better representation

How will we cater to the case when the Owners' addresses are changing throughout the period? and there are multiple instances of owners under the same category? eg we are listed on 4 exchanges and all the tokens are owned in different addresses?

##### Unlock Data

An _Unlock Data_ object provides information about when the funds held in an allocation wallet will become fully vested
or unlocked.

| Name              | Type             | Required | Rationale                                                                                                                  |
|-------------------|------------------|----------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| timestamp         | String           | Yes      | ISO-8601 Extended timestamp signalling when funds will become "unlocked" or "vested". Example: `2024-01-01T00:00:00+00:00` |
| unlock_quantity   | Unsigned Integer | No       | The amount of tokens that will become unlocked at the specified timestamp                                                  |

> | unlock_percentage | Unsigned Float   | No       | The percentage of locked tokens that will becoe unloacked at the specified timestamp                                       |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| unlock_percentage | Unsigned Float   | No       | The percentage of locked tokens that will become unlocked at the specified timestamp                                       |
```

#### Funding Detail

Funding details attempt to provide context and information to raises (public or private) that were held by the project,
the valuation of both the project and individual tokens at the time of the raise, and the total amount raised.

| Name      | Type                                               | Required | Rationale                                                                                                                      |
|-----------|----------------------------------------------------|----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| timestamp | String                                             | Yes      | ISO-8601 Extended timestamp signalling when funds will become "unlocked" or "vested". Example: `2024-01-01T00:00:00+00:00`     |
| type      | Unsigned Integer\<[funding-types](#funding-types)> | Yes      | The unsigned integer representation for a given "type" of funding round. Example: `1`                                          |

> | price     | Unsigned Float                                     | Yes      | The price per token, in USD, charged during the funding round. Example: `0.001`                                                |

Reviewer: instead of utilising the USD price only, we should also include the L1 or other CNT price, as in the last two ICO instances we have seen them starting at a certain USD valuation and as the ICO happened for more than 1 day the Price of ADA (L1) changed a lot in that period and the Project received a lot higher USD funding (could have been lower too) while the L1 Token amount remained same.

Arweave or IPFS. However, platforms should accept documents published via traditional means such as HTTPS or FTP.

In order to prove the validity of the document, when publishing to the blockchain the document should be
published in the format of a URI that points to the document itself along with a SHA256 checksum of the document
contents (similar to how stake pool metadata is currently handled).

## Path to Active

### Acceptance Criteria

- [ ] Complete all "TODO" tasks based on currently identified shortcomings as well as feedback received.
- [ ] Receive community feedback and refinement from affected parties and potential implementors.
- [ ] Achieve buy-in from ecosystem participants to analyze and display data based on this spec

### Implementation Plan

- [ ] Invite identified stakeholders and market experts to review and provide feedback to the specification.
- [ ] Published OSS solutions for generation of FUDS documentation for projects
- [ ] Published OSS solutions for indexing of FUDS documentation for aggregators

## Copyright

This CIP is licensed under [CC-BY-4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode).

> ## Footnotes

Reviewer 2: Since we don't have a section like this (e.g. I had to eliminate it from my own CIP when standardising it: https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/429), and given this is hypertext after all, can you fold these footnote links into SEO anchors in the document itself so this section can be eliminated?

If this is not considered necessary then maybe @KtorZ will overrule this suggestion.

Author: Yeah, I'm conflicted. I feel like re-introducing the full link and comment about "what it is" where these things are referenced in the context of the CIP distracts from the language of what we're attempting to explain in the CIP... This is why I opted for a Wiki-like "References" section.
